Okay, the tape is rolling.
You don't go to conventions.
I noticed in Locust that you finally went to one.
I didn't regard that as a convention.
Okay, would you just prefer not to meet the fans personally or is it just kind of you're
happy where you're doing?
You don't especially like to travel.
No, it's a very simple answer that nobody believes.
I don't like to travel.
Way, way back I was born in England.
I lived a year in Spain.
I came to this country until I was a teenager.
I never spent more than two years in any one place.
I finally spent four years.
I was at boarding school, in high school.
And when I finally got married and settled down, I said I don't want to move.
Well, I was eligible for the draft.
I got moved again in the Army, you know, two years back and forth.
When I finally got where I wanted to be, which was warm, it was in Florida.
I settled down and I don't like to move.
I just don't do it voluntarily.
I'm too used to being uprooted in childhood.
So it's just a dislike for travel.
Locally, I go and I dress the classes of my daughters in school.
I don't have any trouble with this.
It does take time and of course my time is valuable.
But I like to meet people, especially when they're talking about my work.
That's always easy to do.
But going to a convention would mean go a week or so of my time.
That is, I would have to prepare.
I would have to get an airplane or a drive.
I would have to come back.
I would have to catch up on my sleep.
I mean, oh no, it would be about a week gone, even if it were only a three-day convention.
When you figure the preparation time and the recovery time and the travel time,
a week of my time these days is worth a couple thousand dollars.
And I have to think, is this worth this amount to me to go and meet a few people?
Well, it depends on the people.
I went to this SF research association meeting in Kansas.
For two reasons.
One, I wanted to give my other daughter some experience.
I mentioned I'd taken one daughter when she was eight, well, I was 12, it was her turn,
to go somewhere and do something, get a ride in the airplane,
have had some experience away from home that was really meaningful.
But also, they happened to have at that meeting, Theodore Sturgeon, whose work I've admired
since I started reading science fiction.
They had Frederick Poe, who I think may be the best writer in the genre today.
They had Jack Williamson, who was the author of the very first science fiction novel
in the first magazine I read, introduced the head James Gunn, who wrote one of my favorite
all time stories.
In other words, they had about four people there whose work I had really admired.
And that was enough to make me, well, if I could meet them all at one time, you see,
that made it pay.
I went there to meet the people.
I did meet them, complimented them on their work.
People asked me for autographs.
I never asked, I don't care about signatures, but I took Sturgeon's more than human, my
35 cent copy, battered, and dates from the 50s, brought it to him, asked him to sign it.
It's the only autograph I ever saw, or probably ever will, to seek.
Simply as a gesture, because admiration for this man's work.
So I went.
I didn't regard it as a convention, I guess it took on some convention aspects, but I
went because it was a meeting where several people I wanted to meet were.
I did meet them, now that I've met them, I don't need to meet them again, and I'd probably
be years before I go anywhere again.
Your statement at the first saying how much money you would lose in a week prompted one
of our people to ask, do you do anything for relaxation?
So I'll broaden the question.
What kind of schedule do you work five days, seven days a week?
How many hours a day?
People often ask me that, and I have a standard answer.
I work all the time that my family will let me.
You see, we have horses and dogs, feed the horses, chores in the morning take half an
hour before I get up at six and about a quarter of seven, then I can settle down to my breakfast
so that I don't have all the time of the day.
I get about six hours a day, seven days a week.
So it comes out close to a 40 hour a week working time.
I try to read a little around the edges, and if I have to answer correspondence, it comes
out at that time.
The rest of the time is taken just in the business of living, of with horses and just
reading the mail that comes in, eating and so on.
So that even so, I'm fairly well paid now.
This is a recent advantage.
I mean, I earn a lot more now than I used to.
You see, you forget that I sold my first story in 1962, published in 1963.
I earned $20 for my first year of riding.
I earned $160.
I had all those lean years before I worked up the fat years, where now I do earn a good
amount.
I regarded as balancing out the earlier years.
If you took my whole career as a rider, it would not be such a phenomenal income.
I didn't get it earlier, and then I do get it now.
But of course, if I go somewhere now, it comes out of what I'm earning now, so that's the
way I have to figure it.
Any chance with your schedule and with the number of books you've written lately you
could get burned down on riding?
Well, I wondered when, did you see my novel, Fisca's Circle, in the author's note?
Yes, I read that, uh-huh.
That's about as close as I've come, and that was an illness that I was trying to ride a
knoll, and I had a month-long fever, and I wasn't suffering pain, but always with the
illness.
I don't know where it's going.
The doctor couldn't do anything.
I mean, is this leading to death, or is it just a minor thing?
I had no way of knowing.
It reacquainted me with my own mortality, and someone shook me up.
And I just didn't see the world the same way after that.
And so I had to take stock and say, what do I really want to do?
And I had serious doubt whether I wanted to continue to write science fiction.
Now, that would extend to fantasy also.
The thing about fantasy is so easy and so much fun that while I'm in doubt, I can simply
do it and make money.
I didn't take nearly as much of a conscious decision there because my guts aren't in the
fantasy so much.
It is less important to me.
It's more important financially, but it's less important in terms of my life's work,
see what I mean?
So I just had to think about it.
But as it turned out, when I found a way to stretch the boundaries to include the new
themes that I wanted to work on with inside the genre of science fiction, then it's fine.
And I go right ahead and write.
So burnout, I don't think so.
I don't suffer from writer's block and I doubt that I'll suffer from burnout.
I still have more ideas to write than I have time to write.
I have a couple other projects I want to do and I can't make time for them.
I'm too busy with the paying writing, you see.
It appears that along in late 1977, I guess when the cluster books came out and then a
list exploded as far as your productivity, you'd put up one or two novels a year for
the previous years and then all of a sudden just a whole lot of novels.
What happened then?
That's not actually true.
You see, I mentioned before I was getting blacklisted, I could only sell a portion of what I wrote.
I was writing it.
I'd piled up eight novels unsold.
So in the 70s, say 50% of my output was getting into print.
But when I finally got through that, it finally became apparent to some of these publishers
that I was the one that was right, you see.
See, the word was being spread by the blacklisted how difficult a writer I was to deal with
and don't deal with this guy and so on.
It's just nothing but trouble.
When I finally, when that passed and I got to working with editors who knew me personally
and knew it wasn't sell, then I could sell everything I wrote.
So now you're seeing everything I write and it looks like an explosion, but I always was writing at that pace.
I just couldn't get it into print.
I still have several novels unsold and I have stories.
I don't write them anymore, but at one point I assembled a whole volume, over 100,000 words,
just of my own full stories.
Put it together, I call it anthology, put on my name and anthology, tried to sell it that way.
I couldn't.
So that the answer is you're just seeing my work.
Now actually I probably am more productive now than I was, but that's not a case of doing three times as much.
It's a case of doing perhaps 50% more.
Over the years I've gotten more experience so that I'm just more efficient at writing.
I also have more time.
My daughters are now teenagers instead of in the twos and threes and it takes me less time.
I don't need to worry about taking care of them.
They're off to school and I have time to write.
So that my situation has gradually changed.
It's probably my throat here.
Alright, let's see. I've lost track again. Did I answer your question?
Yeah, that pretty much answers that. It really wasn't an explosion.
An explosion is more apparent than real.
I do do about a third of a million words a year, but I always was a fairly prolific writer.
I'm a slow writer, but I write all the time so that I get a lot done.
Do you type your first draft or handwrite it and then type it or what?
I use to type it back in the 1960s, but when my first child was born in 1967,
my wife was out working because I didn't earn enough writing to support us.
So I took care of my baby girl, changing her diapers and all this.
That played havoc with my writing because I couldn't still download and typewriter.
She was hyperactive and she wouldn't let me out of her sight.
So that for a while I tried typing with the having the, again what you call it,
the bassinet serve a little cradle I put in my lap and as long as I typed,
she would be satisfied. But then if I stopped to think, she would wake up and start fussing.
So I had to shift from the typewriter. I couldn't work that way.
So that I went to a pencil and clipboard and I could literally drop the clipboard
and grab her before she hit the ground if she was falling.
Once she got over that stage, I found it so much more useful to be able to write with the clipboard
that I just continued because now I write my wife drives and I simply sit there and write.
I can't read while driving. I get carsick. But I don't have to see, I don't have to read what I'm writing.
You see, I just need to see my place so I can write while driving.
So clipboard when I went to Kansas, I wrote several hundred words in the air,
you know, writing in the airplane. I just had my clipboard there.
It would be hard to do with a typewriter.
So it was just so versatile that I just continued it and now I do all of my writing in pencil on the clipboard.
Then for the second draft I type it, get an idea of what I have and then I type it again for the formal submission draft.
My creative work is done in pencil now.
You seem to stick almost completely to novels. You don't seem to have had as many short stories as a lot of people
and you do write the novels. Are you comfortable in a short story form as well?
This is another change that was dictated by economics. I was comfortable in the short story form
and in the novelette form. I only sold one out of four that I did.
That was when I was earning $1,000 a year from writing. It wasn't enough.
Inflation has changed things. This was back in the 60s but I needed more than that.
I hear this interference again. You can hear me?
Yeah, I can hear you fine. I think we'll be able to filter it out.
I had to learn to do novels. They were not my natural form. I had a great deal of difficulty.
I had to work. My career has really gone through a stair-step series of things I described,
shifting to the pencil and paper so I could keep on working.
Learning to do the novel, I did it because it was the only way I would be able to earn my living.
Unless I could eventually earn my living and writing, I couldn't afford to continue doing it.
My wife was working to support me. That's okay. She understood.
But I wanted to get on my feet and not be dependent. You might say forever.
Of course, later on when I started earning more, her whole income was going just to pay the tax on mine.
She finally had to quit working. She couldn't afford to really.
But in the early days, it wasn't that way. So I was able to support my family once I shifted to novels.
But the first novel that I got into print, Thone, was very meticulously pieced together.
Much smaller elements. It actually divides up into about 36 small parts carefully put together
because I couldn't just start at the beginning and do a novel through to the end.
The second one I worked on was this Arabian Night's Fantasy adaptation of Hassan.
I had the storyline there from the classic story you see.
So it was though somebody else had designed it, I collaborated with a, well, couldn't even say a dead man.
I mean, this story had been in the circulation for many centuries.
I did a couple of collaborations with other people. And finally, with my novel, Microscope, I did one big novel,
unified all the way through. It was always conceived as a big novel.
And after that, I knew I had mastered the novel form. I didn't worry about it anymore.
But that's, it was hard. The novel was not my natural form. I guess it is now.
But I had to acquire that taste. Had I had my own way, I would have stayed in the stories and the novelettes.
But again, so much of my life has been dictated by economic considerations. I wish it were not so.
I would rather have been a kind of writer than the critics applaud.
A highly literary writer doesn't have to worry about things like food and rent and mortgage.
But I always had to consider the economic aspect. So it was economics that put me into novels.
Once I got there, I found I liked it. And now I have really very little interest.
I did last month's Do A Story upon request, A Fantasy Story.
Before that time, I think I'd done 15 novels in the 100,000 word category.
And then, purely as another fantasy and an amateur magazine had asked for 50 word stories.
That's 50 words, half a hundred. I did three of those. So I did 100,000 words or 50 words and nothing in between for the past five or six years.
You mentioned a while ago that you had gotten your bachelor's degree in writing.
When did you, at what point in your life did you decide to be a writer?
Well, when I was two years in college. In 1954, I had gone through, I said it was eight years, it was six years.
I'd taken courses through four years of high school and through two years of college.
And decided what I wanted to major in. I said, I really can't do it at heart. I'm not good enough.
I see the difference between a commercial and somebody who can sell his art.
I mean, I was a good artist for the average man on the street, but to sell it, I just didn't think I was that good.
I said, well, then what am I going to do? I'm in college education to complete here.
I have to choose a major, do something important.
So I went to writing. I really, I felt maybe I had something to say and I went ahead and tried it.
I finished out, wrote a novel for my graduating thesis, never published.
And that was the point of decision. I had to decide it in order to finish college.
I did decide it. I never regretted it actually. It turned out I've made many wrong decisions.
It turned out to be one of the right decisions.
What influenced you to write science fiction instead of mysteries or porn or romance?
What I read was science fiction. It was the one genre that I was conversant in.
The time I was 13 and first discovered a astounding science fiction magazine.
It was called Astounding in those days. It got hooked into it.
And what I did for entertainment, it was science fiction.
It was a whole different world, multiple worlds, each one of them better than the one I knew.
And so that when I thought about writing, I said, if I go to some other genre that I'm not familiar with,
I'll make all these mistakes. Whereas in science fiction, I knew that what I did was original
because I had read everything in the field. Now, at today you can't do that.
There's so much more published. But back in those days, there was astounding science fiction.
There was galaxy. There was fantasy in science fiction. And there was amazing stories.
And that was about it. That was about all. You read four-monthly or bi-monthly magazines.
There was not much in the paperbacks. They were just starting up.
Then Valentine Books was just starting a program with paperback novels.
So that it was possible to keep up with the entire field. And I did. Then.
So I knew it. I got into what was familiar and never left it.
And I said, now I tried to leave it and I'm unable to.
How did you break into science fiction? Then you started writing it. How long did it take you to break in?
Okay. I think I answered that. It took me eight years of writing.
Okay. Do you keep up with science fiction now with what's coming out or any small fraction of it?
I tried to. I tried to. On the slow reader, I read it about 150 words a minute.
It has to do with my education and follow-ups and so on. I got locked into a slow read.
I can read faster, but when I do, I don't enjoy it and I don't have any retention. I don't really understand it.
So that I have to be very choosy on what I read because most of my waiting time is taken up in writing.
And I read slowly. So I select, I look at novels, I see what's winning awards.
I read reviews, try to see what might interest me. A lot of what I read is for research.
So I try to keep up, but I only read a very, very small fraction of what's published and often for perhaps the wrong reasons.
I've read one novel, for example, by Gene Wolf. I don't know if he's familiar with him.
Oh, I'm very familiar with him.
I don't say he's regarded in the brighter circles as one of the best writers in the genre.
Well, that's not why I read the first of his torture or novels.
It's because it happened to be running very closely parallel to one of mine in sales.
And I was curious, what is this one that I keep running next with, you know, what's it like? Is it like mine?
So I read it and then said, hey, this guy is a good writer.
But it was that, you might say, that accidental. I just don't have time to read the whole field.
If I know that somebody's good, I will read to see for myself.
But the fact is they're more good writers now than I can keep up with.
In many people whose work I would enjoy, but I just don't have the time to read them, which I regress.
Perhaps if I were a fast reader, but I took a speed reading course once and they didn't know what they were doing.
They didn't teach me anything.
So between the limitation of time and the slowness, I'm always reading something.
And in the course of a year, I'll read 20 or 30 novels.
But I know other people, they may read that much, you know, in a month.
They cover a month. Of course, they're not trying to write novels at the same time.
So I try to keep up with the important figures of the day.
And some, Gene Wolfe was one.
Right now I'm reading a Larry Nevin novel called Dream Park, just to keep up with what Larry Nevin is doing,
because he's more or less one of my contemporaries.
He broke into writing it about the same time I did.
That sort of thing. I wish I were.
I can't regard myself as being well educated in the field now because of the smallness of the amount that I read.
Phone was your first novel, as you mentioned, while it go.
And it was pretty popular. I don't know what the sales were, but it was nominated.
Was it for both awards? I know it was for at least one of them.
It came in third for the Nebulon. It came in third for the Hugo.
Surely that must have helped give you a boost, just a middle boost for your first novel to do that well.
Well, I guess I know. I thought it worked. But that was the publisher.
That was Valentine Books. They gave me dishonest reports.
I was paid $1,500 for that novel, and it had sales in England and in France and in Holland,
and they showed me that the novel was far from earning out its advance.
Well, now money was worth more in those days than now.
But these days, for the last novel I had in the first two months of publication, it earned out $18,000.
I don't think I've changed that much. They were not giving me honest statements,
and I got the evidence to prove it. I got the money, but I also got blacklisted.
So I never had accurate statistics on how well that did. It may have done well,
but the sales statistics I got showed that it sold maybe 45,000 copies and went dead.
I don't believe them, but that's all the evidence I have.
Then in the next years after the phone, you wrote, I guess, the Battle Circle novels,
where the next ones are at least the first couple of those. Is that correct?
Yes. The order I wrote them and the order they're published are not necessarily the same.
The first of the Battle Circle novels was Social The Rope, and that was done so I could enter a contest.
Pyramid had this $5,000 contest. Good money in those days. I entered this novel, and it was.
Then later on, I did a sequel to it, and Pyramid bounced it.
They wrote me this fancy letter saying,
we wish we could tell you how much we like this novel and that we want to publish it, but we don't.
Then they sent it back. It had to be published by a different publisher,
who then rejected the third novel in the series. That was Bantam.
So three novels, there, finally, Avon got them, put them all together,
and it's been pretty successful ever since.
And Nick the Sword never was published by himself in the state, was it?
It was, but it was in England, never in this country. Bantam Books bought it and wrote it off.
Do you know what I mean by writing it off?
Right.
They bought it, they paid for it, and they refused to publish it.
It was too violent for them. It was a violent novel,
but I wish they'd paid attention to this name, which was vengeance and the futility of vengeance.
I had something to say about vengeance there, and I feel I did a good job at showing what it's like.
If you live a life that's based on vengeance, this is what it's going to be like.
But nobody ever commented on it. I never got any fan letters. Nobody ever understood that.
And the publisher, having bought it, had to change a better version and wrote it off.
And so I'm glad that Avon finally did put it into print.
Macroscope, you feel, was your, oh, say, your first crowning achievement,
where you thought you had learned to write novels finally?
Yes, so after that I was confident that I could do it.
It was 190,000 words long, and so that I could do that, I could do any length.
And I felt it was the major novel of my career until I did Tarot.
I still regarded the second major novel and have done it.
Did you get fan mail on Macroscope or continue to?
Yes, I've had quite a bit over the years. Many people have written to admire it.
Of course, Macroscope had a problem. I thought that if novels like Stone were placing third on the Hugo and Nebula,
what would a novel like Macroscope, which I regard as a much more important work,
it wasn't permitted on the ballot at all.
It wasn't permitted on the ballot?
Yes, I had a lot of trouble.
The publishers would distribute novels to the Science Fiction Writers of America, SFWA.
And I got my publisher Avon to agree to distribute this novel to them so that people could read it.
The membership were expecting the novel to be distributed.
The publisher followed up and sent out the novel so that it arrived about a month after the nominations ballot had closed.
I got several letters from people saying, look, I know this is a great novel.
I'll probably read it and might get nominated. But where is it?
Well, the publisher had not distributed it.
So that I then wrote to the president, SFWA, who was Gordon Dixon, and said, look,
I believe that I've written a major novel of my career. My other ones have been placing high.
I feel that if this novel were given a fair chance to be nominated, it would make the ballot.
So it wasn't your fault, but it didn't. But will you permit writing a vote on the ballot since the ballot was closed?
And he wrote back and said no. So I think had they been... See, once it was distributed, people could read it and nominate it,
but the nominations were closed. So if a write-in had been permitted, I think it could have made the ballot.
But Gordon Dixon refused to allow a write-in. And so it was not permitted to compete. And that's it.
It went nowhere. The major novel of the first decade of my writing existence.
It did make the Hugo ballot. It came in third on the Hugo. The problem there is that for about ten years,
the winner of the Nebula ballot was almost automatically the winner of the Hugo.
And mine was not even on the Nebula ballot. So a lot of people didn't bother to read it.
I'm pleased that it did come up from nowhere. It was the only novel that made the Hugo ballot that hadn't been on the Nebula ballot.
So it's like, you know, if you were in a race and everybody else took off, and you came in, you know, two minutes later on this hundred-yard dash,
and you had to start to compete, if you get through you're even in place, you're doing pretty well.
So I feel that the novel did pretty well considering, and the SFWA published what amounted to an apology for it.
Later on they had their collection of Nebula Award winners discuss the novels in them, discuss all the novels on the ballot, plus one.
That is plus a microscope, more or less apologetically, trying to explain why it wasn't on the ballot.
And that was it. I was not pleased. I thought that they should have permitted a writing ballot so that my novel had a chance at least to compete, but they did not.
Okay. We'll ask you one last question then. Why do you use the nom de plume, Piers Anthony, instead of your real last name?
Okay. I decided on that before I ever sold a thing, and I said, supposing I write, and just supposing I'm successful, and just supposing I get to be famous.
Oh, this was an awful lot of supposing. I mean, I didn't even sold anything. I'd been trying for several years and had...
I've heard about writers, such as John D. McDonald, a mystery writer, and he had to move several times because people would come in and just drop in.
They would assume that he had nothing better to do than to talk with every fan that dropped in on his address. And so he would have to move so his address would be lost.
It would take him two or three years to find him, and then they'd take up his time again. Why have this happened to me? If I ever get that well known, the answer was to use the pin name.
So I set up with the pin name from the outset, and it has protected me. I get a lot of fan mail. It goes through the publisher. I don't get many people dropping in on me because they can't find me.
They can look up in the phone book. I don't know, maybe there's somebody locally called Anthony that keeps getting people dropping in on him. It's not me, you see.
So I have protected myself. If I want someone to know who I am, I can tell them. But the stranger that just says, hey, gee, there's this writer. I think I'll drop in on him. He is unable to find me.
And so now I'm beginning to approach the sort of success that the pseudonym was prepared for. I really never thought I would get there. I was just saying, suppose.
And I planned well. I'm having more success than I really believed I would have. And now my pin name is serving to protect me, to protect my time, really.
It's not that I'm not talking with people, but you know, there will be a lot of people that would just like to come. If there's a writer there, they won't even have read anything by that author.
They say, gee, that's a writer. I'll go talk to them. But I don't need that sort of thing.
I'm willing to talk to people that have read my works, that want to talk to me, ask me intelligent questions, that people more like you, you see.
I'm not willing to talk to the man off the street. We just has heard that I'm a writer. He doesn't even know what I'm writing about.
But just if there's a writer, he just wants to go and talk to him and take up his time. So that's the reason. Again, a rather commercial reason, if you will.
But I think it's effective.
Well, I'm very glad that your plans, your carefully worked out plans were worth it. That's nice.
I hope that sounds so negative. But actually, now I do need to protect my time.
Of course. Well, sir, we appreciate the time you spent with us. It's been very enlightening.
I hope you can digest it down.
I'm not talking here, which is the danger. You may have trouble getting it down to your five minute segment.
Well, that's going to be the hard part. But again, it's much easier to have to cut. That sort of thing that it is to try to stretch.
It's in limits, I suppose. Yes, no, it wouldn't be a very good answer.
No, some people just are a little bit more reticent. Some of the people that we talk to are actually a little bit shy, which I can understand and are not confident that their answers are.
I'm an English teacher. I've been in front of classes and so on, so that's not a problem.
Okay, great. Well, we sure look forward to whatever else you put out.
I hope it works out and I hope that your listeners like it.
Great. We sure appreciate your talking to us and we'll get you copies of the programs. I imagine it'll be about a month and a half or so, but we will get them to you.
And thanks again. Enjoyed it very much. Okay, good night now.